---
layout: post
title: RegEx
permalink: code/regex
categories: Code
tags: 
---

[Regular Expression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression), (RegEx) is a sequence of characters that specifies a search pattern in text. Also called a "pattern". The [python standard library package](https://docs.python.org/3/library/re.html) called `re` or the [more feature rich custom package](https://pypi.org/project/regex/) called `regex`.

A RegEx is useful if you have a string of text called `string` and you want a list of all the matches of words starting with say `express...` `r"express(.*?)\b"`. Best practice involves a few steps:

#### 0. Get the string

```python
>>>string = r"expression and expressive"
```

#### 1. Compile the expression

```python
>>>import re
>>>pattern = re.compile(r"express(.*?)\b")
```

`Pattern` is now a __re.compile-object__.

#### 2. Run a method on the pattern

You now run the `.finditer(…)` method on `pattern`, specifying `string` as the argument:

```python
>>>match_object_iterator = pattern.finditer(string)
```

You now have an __iterator-object__ containing __re.match-objects__.

#### 3. Return the Matching Group for each Match

Here I am returning

- group `0`, which means the whole expression,
- group `1`, which is the part in brackets.

```python
>>>for i, mo in enumerate(match_object_iterator):
...  print(i, mo.group(0))
...  print(i, mo.group(1))
...
0 expression
0 ion
1 expressive
1 ive
```

This guide will now talk only about how to make the `r"an expression"` part. RegEx is powerful and compelling because it makes otherwise complex find-and-replace, or parsing operations trivial and it is useful in every field of computing.

***

## Conventions

In this guide, I use:

- `…` to refer to a part of an expression, any unconnected series of character. This is to distinguish it from three literal full-stops  `...`.
- `▯` to refer to any single character.
- `#` to refer to any singe digit character.
- `r"…"` to refer to the complete expression raw-string, as entered into python.

***

## Resources

### Reference

[Canonical Reference](https://www.regular-expressions.info/)
[Quick Reference](https://www.computerhope.com/unix/RegEx-quickref.htm)
[Thorough Reference](https://www3.ntu.edu.sg/home/ehchua/programming/howto/RegExe.html)

### Testers

[RegEx101](https://RegEx101.com/)

### Exercises

[HackerRank: Easier Quiz](https://www.hackerrank.com/domains/regex)
[Regex101: Harder quiz](https://regex101.com/quiz)
[Flashcards](https://quizlet.com/1523733/regular-expressions-flash-cards/)

### Visualisers

[Visualise RegEx in a diagram](https://RegExper.com/)

***

## Normal Characters

All letters and numbers and many symbols in ASCII are typed in literally:
`a`-`z` `A`-`Z` `0`-`9` `_` `-` `,` `!` `&` `,` `;`

For example:

- The spacebar character `` is a literal whitespace also known as a blank.
- `,`  is a literal comma
- `` ` `` is a literal backtick

***

## Special Characters `[\^$.|?*+()`

`[\^$.|?*+()` need to be escaped with a preceding `\` to match literally:

Their special purposes (in python re) are:

- `[` start of a character class. (The closing bracket `]` only needs to be escaped to include it within a character class)
- `(` and `)` start and end of a string group
- `\` is either escape or group back-reference character
- `^` is either start of line anchor or NOT operator in bracket list as: `[^…]`
- `$` is end of line anchor
- `.` matches any single character except newline
- `|` is the OR operator in a strings group `(…|…)`
- `*` is the [Kleene Star](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kleene_star) a 0 or more modifier.
- `?` is either a 0 or 1 character-modifier, a non-greedy as modifier-modifier `*?` or a group-type modifier as `(?…)`,
- `+` is a 1 or more modifier
- `/` is Delimiter special in PERL, but not in Python

However, inside character-classes `[…]`, special characters are literal and do not to be escaped with the following exceptions:

- `\`
- `]`
- `-`
- `/` in PERL, but not in Python

#### The Delimiter `/`

In PERL and other old RegEx languages a 'delimiter' marks the start and end of the whole expression e.g.: `/^expression$/`. It must be escaped within the expression as`\/`, even in character classes as `[…\/…]`.  In the [online checker tool](https://regex101.com/), the `/` is added implicitly to start and end of the expression, as in PERL and must therefore be escaped.

But, in python `re` and `regex`, the delimiter `/` is not to be escaped. The expression is instead delimited implicitly with string quotes `"`, e.g.: `r"^expression$"`.

***

## Meta-Characters `\w` `\s` `\d` `\n`

Escape sequences, `\` were invented in the C programming language and the convention was expanded for Regex to include far more. The following are true for all RegEx flavours:

`\w`  a word character (letter, number or underscore), equivalent to `[a-zA-Z0-9_]`
`\W` anything but a word character i.e. `[^a-zA-Z0-9_]`
`\s` whitespace (space, tab, newline or, form-feed)
`\S` anything but whitespace

`\d` digit character equivalent to `[0-9]`
`\D` anything but a digit, equivalent to `[^0-9]`

`\n` linefeed. Will match the `LF` in `CR LF`
`\N` Not newline. Equivalent to `.`

Finally, bucking the trend:
`\R`  Matches all [line-break characters](https://sebanalysis.github.io/code/plain-text). Matches a whole `CR LF` as one character but also matches:  `CR`  `LF` and `U+0085` (a.k.a "New Line")

To write [whitespace apart from newline you need](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3469080/match-whitespace-but-not-newlines):
`[^\S\r\n]`

***

## Start And End Anchors `^…$`

Anchors are zero-length matches. I.e. they match the boundaries between or before or after words and string, and not characters themselves.

- `^` means the first character in the string
- `$` means the last character in the string

By default they are tied to the start and end of the string. But, they can be made to match line-breaks too `\n`, by adding the `multi-line` flag as an argument to the particular RegEx function.

***

## Word Boundary Anchor `\b…\b`

The `\b` anchor matches a cursor position between a word character and a non-word character.

- Words are made up of letters, numbers or underscore. As a character class they are: `[a-zA-Z0-9_]`
- Non-Words are made up of anything but these characters, e.g . `SPACE`, `-`, `/`.

Never write two consecutive anchors e.g. `\b\b`, `^\b...` or `…\b$` as you cannot have two sequential cursor positions, un-separated by a character.

> `\b` does NOT refer to a space it means a text cursor position between two characters. Also called a '[caret](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caret_navigation)' 'pointer' or 'insertion point.

Note: Bucking the convention of meta-characters, there is no `\B` (anything but a word boundary) as it is an anchor not a character.

***

## Groups `(…)` and `(…|…)`

Provides a way to:

- apply occurrence modifiers to a part of an expression e.g. `(…)*`.
- later extract different parts of the match from the resulting match object.

A pipe separator `|`  within the group means either/or in an expression: (a|b|c) means a b or c.  Therefore: [abc] is equivalent to (a|b|c)

`r"﹍"` The whole expression itself is group number 0

`"…(﹍)…` a normal group, number-labelled by order of opening bracket.

`"…(?P<name>﹍)…"` A named group, that later can be later retrieved from a match object. These don't work in Notepad++'s PERL RegEx implementation, so I try to avoid them.

`(?:…)` Non-capturing group
Means the group cannot be back-referenced later on with `\#`. I.e. it skips the numbering of this group.

#### Note

- You still need to escape characters in the brackets.
- Occurrence modifiers after the brackets apply to the whole string group e.g. `(…)*`
- A repeated capturing group will only capture the last iteration. Optionally:
  - Put a capturing group around the repeated group to capture all iterations in a single group or;
  - Write individual groups for each value.

***

## Character Class `[…]` and `[^…]`

Match any of the characters in the list. The whole list matches a single character.

- `[abc]` matches any of the characters a, b or c.
- `[^abc]` matches anything but a, b or c. I.e. anything but any of the individual characters in this range. In other words, `^` is a NOT modifier for the character class.

No need to use escape characters for special characters apart from \ and -  within these square brackets

Can represent a span of ASCII characters between a range demarcated by `-`:
`[a-z]` matches any lowercase letter a to z
`[A-Z]` matches any uppercase letter A-Z
`[a-zA-Z]` matches any uppercase or lowercase letter
`[0-9]`matches any digit

***

## Occurrence Modifiers `{…}`, `*`, `?` and `+`

A.K.A. Repetition Modifiers, Quantifiers or Alternations. These only have meaning in conjunction with the preceeding character.

I'll use `▯` here as a placeholder to mean any non-modifier character, meta-character or group.

- `▯*` , the Kleene star, matches 0 or more of `▯`.
- `▯+` matches 1 or more of `▯`,
- `▯?` matches 0 or 1 of of `▯`. `?` doesn't greedy-non-greedyness here.

- `▯{…,﹍}` match a specific range of occurances of `▯`:
  - `▯{2}` matches exactly 2 sequential occurances
  - `▯{2,}` matches at least 2 occurances
  - `▯{,2}` matches up to 2 occurances
  - `▯{2,3}` matches 2 to 3 occurances

When a modifier is placed after another modifier, the behaviour is different.

I didn't initially understand modifiers:

- The typical definition is 'modifies the preceeding character to match a specific number of occurences'. Without context, I thought it was operating as a lookahead in the string, not modifying the regex character  to the left of it within the RegEx pattern itself.
- you can only use 1 modifier at a time. You can't combine them. For example, to make a 0 or more modifier, don't use `+?`, use `*`.

#### In RegEx. `.*` is the wildcard character, not a solitary `*`

Most searching tools, such as windows explorer search bar, tend to use an isolated Kleene star`*` to mean a "wildcard". I.e. a sequence of _0 or more_ of any character.

But in a RegEx pattern the `*` is not a character, it is a modifier:

- `.` means a _single occurence of any_ character apart from newline equivalent to `[^\n]`;
- `.*` means _0 or more_ of any character apart from newline, i.e. the wildcard.

In other words, the `*` is just a modifier which means 0 or more of the character immediately to the left of it in the RegEx pattern. In RegEx, `*` doesn't mean anything without a preceding character.

***

## Greedy `▯*` vs Non-Greedy `▯*?`

By default, the `▯*` modifier looks for the longest possible matching string. This is called 'greedy' behavior.

To instead look for the shortest possible matching string, called non-greedy or lazy behavior, write the modified-modifier: `▯*?`.

I initially misunderstood this symbol. The `?` can only change the `*` modifier to non-greedy, not a whole group or a whole expression. It is meaningless to have a 'greedy or non-greedy expression', you can only have a 'greedy or non-greedy modifier'.

Also note that without the preceeding modifier, the `?` is a 0-or-1 modifier not a greedy-or-non-greedy modifier.

You can also change the greediness of the `+` and the `?` modifiers with `+?`, `??` respectively, but it is confusing and beyond what you would likely ever need.

***

## Group Backreferences `\#`

I'll use `#`  here to mean any digit. I am not using `▯` because the character must be a digit character specifically.

> Note: in the python re module, syntax is `\#` but in PCRE syntax (used in the Notepad++ RegEx) it is instead `$#`.

If you divide the expression into groups with: ungrouped(group1)ungrouped(group2), you can reference the same match later in the expression:

- `\1` first group's match
- `\2` second group's match
⋮
- `\#` is the `#`<sup>th</sup> group's match.

Note: You don't put brackets around these things.

### Nesting Groups

The group number is the order in which the first opening bracket appears, even if one group is within another.
e.g. :

     |←                 Group 0 (Whole Expression)          →|
     ||←              Group 1                      →|        |
     |||←     Group 2              →|               |        | 
     |||     |←No Group→||←Group 3→||               |        |
    r"^((………(?:……………………)(………………………))………………………………………)﹍﹍﹍﹍$"  ← Expression
       12   -           3                                      ← Opening bracket declaration order

***

## Lookaheads `?=` and Lookbehinds `?<=`

A lookahead `(?=﹍)`is effectively just a non-caputuring group which matches to the end of the string by default. Its is equivalent to adding an end anchor to a non-capturing group as: `(?:﹍$)`.

A lookbehind  `(?<=﹍)` is equivalent to the non-capturing group as: `(?:^﹍)`.

A _negative_ look-ahead or -behind, involves replacing the the `=` with a `!`.

`(?=…)` Lookahead
`(?!…)` Negative Lookahead

`(?<=…)` Lookbehind. Yes, it has a redundant `=` after the `<`
`(?<!…)` Negative Lookbehind

#### Modifiers are not allowed in look-ahead or -behinds

In most RegEx flavours including the python `re` package, you can't have 'variable width' lookahead or lookbehind statements, meaning you can't use modifiers (`…*`, `…{,}`, `…?` or `…+`) in them.

Instead, use the python `regex` package or use a non-matching group .

See this [stack overflow post](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/23964362/why-cant-you-use-repetition-quantifiers-in-zero-width-look-behind-assertions) for an explanation.

***

## Advanced Grouping

Non-Capturing Group `(?:pattern)`
Recall that you can use Parenthesized Back-References to capture the matches. To disable capturing, use ?: inside the parentheses in the form of (?:pattern). In other words, ?: disables the creation of a capturing group, so as not to create an unnecessary capturing group.

Named Capturing Group `(?P<name>pattern)`
The capture group can be referenced later by name.
The allowed characters are [a-zA-Z0-9_] for a group name

Atomic Grouping `(>pattern)`
Disable backtracking, even if this may lead to match failure.

Conditional `(?(Cond)then|else)`

***

### Practically useless meta-characters, just for completeness

- `\t` Tab, `\T` Not tab
- `\b` or backspace, `\B` Not backspace
- `\h` horizontal whitespace, `\H` not horizontal whitespace
- `\f` form feed, `\F` anything but form feed
- `\v` Vertical Tab, `\V` anything but vertical tab
- `\a` bell character ␇, for 'audible' , is a now useless non-readable character. a stands for 'audible'. Originally sent to ring a small electromechanical bell on tickers and other teleprinters and teletypewriters to alert operators at the other end of the line, often of an incoming message. `\A` anything but bell character.
- `\r` Carriage return `CR`. Will match only the CR in `CR` `LF`
- `\R` Does NOT mean "anything but carriage return". It means either `CR` `LF`, `CR` or `U+0085` a.k.a. 'Next Line'.

In Python `re`, not but original PERL, PCRE or PCRE2:

- `\nooo` octal number where `ooo` is an octal number
- `\uhhhh` any unicode characters up to code-point 10,000 where hhhh is hex number
- `\xhh` 256 bit (i.e. ASCII) character with  where hh is hex number
- `\p{<name>}` matches any character in this 'unicode general category' or 'named block' called: `<name>` eg. `IsGreek`, `IsBasicLatin`, `Sc` (S symbol & c currency)
- `\P{<name>}` not the unicode category name

Only in python `regex` not `re`:

- `\K` removes everything prior in the matching group.
