---
layout: post
title:  RegEx
permalink: RegEx
date: 2022-06-24
categories: Code
tags: 
---
# Regex
Regular Expression, (RegEx) is a symbolic language to describe character sequences. A __"RegEx pattern"__ describes a specific type of sequence and can be used in the python `re` package.

I have described the practical python functions are more comprehensively in: [[Python Regex Functions]]. But in short, if you have a string of text called `string` and you want a list of all the matches of `"an expression"`. Best practice involves a few steps:

#### 1. Compile the expression

	pattern = re.compile(r"an expression")

`Pattern` is now a __re compile object__.

#### 2. Run a method on the pattern
You now run the `.finditer(…)` method on `pattern`, specifying `string` as the argument:

	match_object_iterator = pattern.finditer(string)
	
You now have an interator of match objects.

#### 3. Return the Matching Group for each Match
```python
for i, mo in enumerate(match_object_iterator):
	print(mo.group(0))
```




***

## Conventions

In this guide, I use:

- `…` to refer to a part of an expression, any unconnected series of character. This is to distinguish it from three literal full Stops  `...`.
- `▯` to refer to any single character.


***

## Resources
### Reference
[Canonical Reference](https://www.regular-expressions.info/)
[Quick Reference](https://www.computerhope.com/unix/RegEx-quickref.htm)
[Thorough Reference](https://www3.ntu.edu.sg/home/ehchua/programming/howto/RegExe.html)

### Testers
[RegEx101](https://RegEx101.com/)

### Exercises
[Interactive Quiz](https://www.hackerrank.com/domains/RegEx)
[Flashcards](https://quizlet.com/1523733/regular-expressions-flash-cards/)

### Visualisers
[Visualise RegEx in a diagram](https://RegExper.com/)

***

## Normal Characters 

All letters and numbers and symbols in ASCII:
`a`-`z` `A`-`Z` `0`-`9` `_` `-` `,` ` ` `<` `>`  etc. are typed in literally.

For example
` `  the spacebar character is a literal space character also known as a blank.
`,`  is a literal comma
`` ` `` is a literal backtick
`<`  is literal less-than-sign
`>`  is literal greater than sign

***

## SPECIAL CHARACTERS `[\^$.|?*+()`
These need to be escaped with a preceding `\` to match literally:
`[\^$.|?*+()`
Their purposes are:
-  `[` start of a character class. (Closing bracket never needs to be escaped) 
- `(` and `)` start and end of a string group
- `\` is escape or shortcut character
- `^` is start of line anchor and NOT operator in bracket list i.e. [^…]
- `$` is end of line anchor
- `.` matches any single character except newline
- `|` OR operator in a strings group `(…|…)`
- `*` is a 0 or more modifier
- `?` is a 0 or 1 modifier, non-greedy`*` modifier and, string-groups naming i.e. `(?:…)`, 
- `+` is a 1 or more modifier
- `/` is Delimiter special in PERL, but not in Python

However, inside square `[…]` brackets, special characters are literal and do not to be escaped. The following exceptions do still need to be escaped.:
- `\`
- `]`
- `-`
- `/` in PERL, but not in Python

#### The Delimiter `/`
In PERL and other old RegEx languages a 'delimiter' marks the start and end of the whole expression e.g.: `/^expression$/`. It must be escaped within the expression as`\/`, even in character classes as `[…\/…]`.  In the [online checker tool](https://regex101.com/), the `/` is added implicitly to start and end of the expression, as in PERL and must therefore be escaped.

But, in python `re` and `regex`, the delimiter `/` is not to be escaped. The expression is instead delimited implicitly with string quotes `"`, e.g.: `r"^expression$"`.


***

## META CHARACTERS `\w` `\s` `\d` `\n`

Escape sequences, `\` were invented in the C programming language and the convention was expanded for Regex to include far more. The following are true for all RegEx flavours:

`\w`  a word character (letter, number or underscore), equivalent to `[a-zA-Z0-9_]`
`\W` anything but a word character i.e. `[^a-zA-Z0-9_]`
`\s` whitespace (space, tab, newline or, form-feed)
`\S` anything but whitespace

`\d` digit character equivalent to `[0-9]`
`\D` anything but a digit, equivalent to `[^0-9]`

`\n` linefeed. Will match the LF in `CR LF`
`\N` Not newline. Equivalent to `.`

Finally, bucking the trend:
`\R`  Matches a break on any system. Matches a whole `CR LF`,  `CR`  `LF` and `U+0085` (a.k.a `NEL`)



***

## START AND END ANCHORS `^…$`
Anchors are zero-length matches. I.e. they match the boundaries between or before or after words and string, and not characters themselves. 

- `^` means the first character in the string
- `$` means the last character in the string

By default they are tied to the start and end of the string. But, they can be made to match line-breaks too `\n`, by adding the `multi-line` flag as an argument to the particular RegEx function. 

***

## WORD BOUNDARY ANCHOR `\b…\b`
An anchors match the zero-width location between characters. In other words, a cursor position.

`\b` is a word boundary anchor.

Words are made up of letters, numbers or underscore, i.e. the following character class `[a-zA-Z0-9_]`. 
A `\b` is found between  (not hyphen -)


A word boundary `\b` is therefore a cursor position between a word `[a-zA-Z0-9_]` and a non-word `[^a-zA-Z0-9_]` character.

When specifying boundaries, do not include a `^` immediately before or a `$` immediately after as they are both anchors and you cannot have two sequential cursor positions. 


`\b` does NOT refer to a space. It refers to a cursor location between a space and a [a-zA-Z0-9_].

Note, that out of line with the convention of meta-characters, there is no `\B` (anything but a word boundary) as it is an anchor not a character.

***

## SEQUENCE OF CHARACTERS (A.K.A. STRING GROUP) `(…)` and `(…|…)`

Provides a way to extract specific parts of the match later from the match object.

A pipe separator `|`  within the group means either/or in an expression: (a|b|c) means a b or c.  Therefore: [abc] is equivalent to (a|b|c) 

`r"﹍"` The whole expression itself is group number 0

`(﹍)` a normal group, number-labelled by order of opening bracket.

`(?P<name>﹍)` A Named group, that can 

`(?:…)` Non-capturing group
Means the group cannot be backreferenced later on with `\#`. I.e. it skips the numbering of this group.

#### Note:
- You still need to escape characters in the brackets.
- Occurrence modifiers after the brackets apply to the whole string group e.g. `(…)*`


***

## CHARACTER CLASS A.K.A. BRACKET LIST `[…]` and `[^…]`
Match any of the characters in the list. The whole list matches a single character. 

- `[abc]` matches any of the characters a, b or c.
- `[^abc]` matches anything but a, b or c. I.e. anything but any of the individual characters in this range. In other words, `^` is a NOT modifier for the character class. 

No need to use escape characters for special characters apart from \ and -  within these square brackets

Can represent a span of ASCII characters between a range demarcated by `-`:
`[a-z]` matches any lowercase letter a to z
`[A-Z]` matches any uppercase letter A-Z
`[a-zA-Z]` matches any uppercase or lowercase letter
`[0-9]`matches any digit


***

## Occurrence Modifiers `{…}`, `*`, `?` and `+`
A.K.A. Repetition Modifiers, Quantifiers or Alternations. These only have meaning in conjunction with the preceeding character. 

I'll use `▯` here as a placeholder to mean any non-modifier character, meta-character or group.


- `▯*`	, the Kleene star, matches 0 or more of `▯`.
- `▯+`	matches 1 or more of `▯`,
- `▯?`	matches 0 or 1 of of `▯`. `?` doesn't greedy-non-greedyness here.

- `▯{…,﹍}` match a specific range of occurances of `▯`:
    - `▯{2}` matches exactly 2 sequential occurances
    - `▯{2,}` matches at least 2 occurances
    - `▯{,2}` matches up to 2 occurances
    - `▯{2,3}` matches 2 to 3 occurances

When a modifier is placed after another modifier, the behaviour is different.

I didn't initially understand modifiers:
- The typical definition is 'modifies the preceeding character to match a specific number of occurences'. Without context, I thought it was operating as a lookahead in the string, not modifying the regex character  to the left of it within the RegEx pattern itself.
- you can only use 1 modifier at a time. You can't combine them. For example, to make a 0 or more modifier, don't use `+?`, use `*`.

#### In RegEx. `.*` is the wildcard character, not a solitary `*`
Most searching tools, such as windows explorer search bar, tend to use an isolated Kleene star`*` to mean a "wildcard". I.e. a sequence of _0 or more_ of any character.

But in a RegEx pattern the `*` is not a character, it is a modifier:
-  `.` means a _single occurence of any_ character apart from newline equivalent to `[^\n]`;
-  `.*` means _0 or more_ of any character apart from newline, i.e. the wildcard.

In other words, the `*` is just a modifier which means 0 or more of the character immediately to the left of it in the RegEx pattern. In RegEx, `*` doesn't mean anything without a preceding character.

***

## Greedy `▯*` vs Non-Greedy `▯*?`
By default, the `▯*` modifier looks for the longest possible matching string. This is called 'greedy' behavior. 

To instead look for the shortest possible matching string, called non-greedy or lazy behavior, write the modified-modifier: `▯*?`.

I initially misunderstood this symbol. The `?` can only change the `*` modifier to non-greedy, not a whole group or a whole expression. It is meaningless to have a 'greedy or non-greedy expression', you can only have a 'greedy or non-greedy modifier'. 

Also note that without the preceeding modifier, the `?` is a 0-or-1 modifier not a greedy-or-non-greedy modifier. 

You can also change the greediness of the `+` and the `?` modifiers with `+?`, `??` respectively, but it is confusing and beyond what you would likely ever need.

***

## String Group Backreferences  

If you divide the expression into groups with: ungrouped(group1)ungrouped(group2), you can reference the same match later in the expression:

I'll use `#` here to mean any number, not a literal hash character.

`\1` first group's match
`\2` second group's match
⋮
`\#` `#`th group's match. 

Note: You don't put brackets around these things.

### Nesting Groups

The group number is the order in which the first opening bracket appears, even if one group is within another. 
e.g. :

     |←                 Group 0 (Whole Expression)          →|
     ||←              Group 1                      →|        |
     |||←     Group 2              →|               |        | 
     |||     |←No Group→||←Group 3→||               |        |
    r"^((………(?:……………………)(………………………))………………………………………)﹍﹍﹍﹍$"  ← Expression
       12   -           3                                      ← Opening bracket declaration order


***
## Lookaheads `?=` and Lookbehinds `?<=`

A lookahead `(?=﹍)`is effectively just a non-caputuring group which matches to the end of the string by default. Its is equivalent to adding an end anchor to a non-capturing group as: `(?:﹍$)`. 

A lookbehind  `(?<=﹍)` is equivalent to the non-capturing group as: `(?:^﹍)`.

A _negative_ look-ahead or -behind, involves replacing the the `=` with a `!`.

`(?=…)` Lookahead
`(?!…)` Negative Lookahead

`(?<=…)` Lookbehind. Yes, it has a redundant `=` after the `<`
`(?<!…)` Negative Lookbehind

#### Modifiers are not allowed in look-ahead or -behinds
In most RegEx flavours including the python `re` package, you can't have 'variable width' lookahead or lookbehind statements, meaning you can't use modifiers (`…*`, `…{,}`, `…?` or `…+`) in them. 

Instead, use the python `regex` package or use a non-matching group .

See this [stack overflow post](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/23964362/why-cant-you-use-repetition-quantifiers-in-zero-width-look-behind-assertions) for an explanation.

***

## Advanced Grouping
Non-Capturing Group `(?:pattern)`
Recall that you can use Parenthesized Back-References to capture the matches. To disable capturing, use ?: inside the parentheses in the form of (?:pattern). In other words, ?: disables the creation of a capturing group, so as not to create an unnecessary capturing group.

Named Capturing Group `(?P<name>pattern)`
The capture group can be referenced later by name.
The allowed characters are [a-zA-Z0-9_] for a group name

Atomic Grouping `(>pattern)`
Disable backtracking, even if this may lead to match failure.

Conditional `(?(Cond)then|else)`

***

### Practically useless meta-characters, just for completeness
- `\t` Tab
- `\T` Not tab
- `\b` or backspace
- `\B` anything but backspace
- `\h` horizontal whitespace
- `\H` not horizontal whitespace
- `\f` form feed, FF, \u000C (means new page) 
- `\F` anything but form feed
- `\v` Vertical Tab \u000B
- `\V` anything but vertical tab
- `\a` bell character ␇, is a now useless non-readable character. a stands for 'audible'. Originally sent to ring a small electromechanical bell on tickers and other teleprinters and teletypewriters to alert operators at the other end of the line, often of an incoming message.
- `\A` anything but bell character. 
- `\r` Carriage return. Will match the CR in `CR LF`
- `\R` Does NOT mean "anything but carriage return". It means either `\r\n` or `\n` or U+0085 'next line', a legacy character.

In Python `re`, not but original PERL, PCRE or PCRE2:
- `\nooo` octal number where `ooo` is an octal number
- `\uhhhh` any unicode characters up to code-point 10,000 where hhhh is hex number
- `\xhh`	256 bit (i.e. ASCII) character with  where hh is hex number
- `\p{<name>}` matches any character in this 'unicode general category' or 'named block' called: `<name>` eg. `IsGreek`, `IsBasicLatin`, `Sc` (S symbol & c currency)
- `\P{<name>} ` not the unicode category name

Only in python `regex` not `re`:
- `\K` removes everything prior in the matching group.