

## Install Conda

Install only Miniconda as Anaconda is bloated and doesn't make sense anyway without understanding Miniconda. 

## Initialise Conda

This means adding the conda paths to your shell session profile or registry so the `conda` command is available every time you start up.

- Windows CMD:  `C:\ProgramData\miniconda3\condabin\conda init` writes an `autorun` to the registry path `Computer\HKEY_CURRENT_USER\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Command Processor`. This can interfere when you use subprocess in python and call the script from within powershell as subprocess uses the CMD. Delete this Autorun if you use PowerShell
- Windows PowerShell `C:\ProgramData\miniconda3\condabin\conda init` writes to  `$PROFILE.CurrentUserAllHosts`
- Linux Bash and Powershell `echo ". /home/<user>/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh" >> ~/.profile` Writes to the `~/.profile` file which is used by all shells. Change the to your username.

## Initialise Mamba

In your profile, comment out the conda related init script and instead directly add `C:\ProgramData\mambaforge\condabin` to your system path. 

Now you can use conda and mamba commands, but they both refer back to mambaforge.

You need to restart pycharm for this path to update there.


## Turn off the annoying (base) notification if you use oh-my-posh

`conda config --set changeps1 False` 


## Create environment

NOT `conda env create` :

`conda create -n <env_name> `

But if you are creating from a yml file you need to use:

`conda env create -f requirements.yml`

## Install Requirements to Environment

To install into current environment:

```
conda env update -f environment.yml
```

To install a package including requirements in that package just run pip from within a conda environment. Here 'path' is a directory containing a setup.py, a repo gir+ssh address or a package on PyPi:

```
pip install path
```

If you just want to install the txt format of requirements:

`conda install -r requirements.txt`


## Mixing pip and conda

If pip was originally installed with conda in your environment i.e. with `conda install pip` or installed implicitly as part of an env.yml file, conda does manage pip dependencies and versioning too. So it is ok to mix, but better to install with conda.

The following warning message may occur though:
```
WARNING conda.gateways.disk.delete:unlink_or_rename_to_trash(143): Could not remove or rename
```

Clear out your packages

```python
conda clean --all
```

## Channels

Search for all packages in a channel:
```bash
conda search --override-channels -c channel '*'
```


## Understand the commands

Always activate the relevant environment for your repo before installing as it is non trivial to bulk uninstall all the custom packages in the base environment.

#### Some key commands:

`conda …` means packages

`conda env …` means environment. Except if you are creating one. then its just `conda create -n ...`

## .condarc file
[Guidance](https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/configuration/use-condarc.html)

The .condarc file is found in the home directory and it contains the configuration settings for conda.

#### Add to the condarc file:

```
always_yes: True
channel_priority: true
Channels:
- conda-forge
```

### Install Mamba

Mamba is just a much quicker way of installing packages. Install Mamba with:

```
conda update -y --all
```

```
conda install -c conda-forge mamba
```

Then you can just use the mamba command word instead of conda  in all circumstances. For example the two commands are equivalent but mamba is faster:

```
conda install black
mamba install black
```

Mamba uses the condarc config file too.

### Set the env directory

All envs will be installed to the path set n the condarc:

In Linux should be:
```yml
envs_dirs: 
  - /home/sebastian/miniconda3/envs
```

In windows should be:
```yaml
envs_dirs:
  - C:\ProgramData\Miniconda3\envs
```


## The environment.yaml file

When you want to export an environment with conda you can run the following command to generate an environment file:
```
conda env export > environment.yml
```

You can only import a _new_ environment from an environment file, not a requirements.txt file. 

```
mamba env create --file .\env.yml --name <name>
mamba activate <name>
```

If you don't have an env.yml file, you have to create an empty environment and then install after:

```
mamba env create --name <name>
mamba activate <name>
```

Note that update will __not__ install any new packages from an environment file. It will only update.

```
mamba env update --file .\env.yml --name <name> 
```

Remove an environment if you mess it up. It is not possible to reset an environment:

```
conda env remove --name rapyds
```



## Spyder Troubleshooting
1.  uninstall pyQt using

`conda uninstall pyqt`

2.  uninstall sip package

`conda uninstall sip`

3.  then install these packages in following order

`conda install sip`

`conda install pyqt`

`conda upgrade spyder`

this worked for me.

not creating entire environment straight away
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/43145667/anaconda-is-not-creating-full-environment


## Environment variables

In a python environment you have many of the same environment variables as in the shell. 
- PowerShell environment variables are given by `ls env:` and accessed with `$env:name`. I copied them into a list called winpath.
- Python environment variables are given by `pprint.pprint(dict(os.environ).keys())`  and accessed with `os.environ['name']`

`os.environ` is case sensitive on linux but not on windows. Nevertheless, certain enviroment variable strings are stored in Uppercase in windows and lowercase in python:


The __PowerShell environment variables__ are not in python:

```python
>>> [p for p in map(lambda x: x.lower(), winpath) if p not in map(lambda x: x.lower(), dict(os.environ).keys())]

['conda_prompt_modifier', 'powershell_distribution_chann…']
```

The __python environment variables__ are not in PowerShell 

```python
>>> [p for p in map(lambda x: x.lower(), ) if p not in map(lambda x: x.lower(), dict(os.environ).keys())]
['CONDA_DEFAULT_ENV',
 'CONDA_PREFIX',
 'CONDA_PYTHON_EXE',
 'CONDA_SHLVL',
 'POWERSHELL_DISTRIBUTION_CHANNEL']
```
``

# Errors

## Random loss of ability to use conda

I turned off Documents onedrive sync, which changed the registry path for my user shell folder for my documents from one drive (where my powerershell currentuserallhosts profile is stored) .

That is where the conda init script for powershell goes to:  `$Home\Documents\PowerShell\Profile.ps1`. Just had to run conda init again.

## Unnamed Environments

https://stackoverflow.com/questions/57527131/conda-environment-has-no-name-visible-in-conda-env-list-how-do-i-activate-it-a

## A newer version of conda exists

```
==> WARNING: A newer version of conda exists. <==
  current version: 4.10.3
  latest version: 22.11.1
```

You have to update using the __conda-forge__ channel, not the defaults channel.

```
conda update -n base -c conda-forge conda
```

## ERROR conda.core.link:_execute(740): An error occurred while installing package 'conda-forge::

You cache is likely corrupted

```
conda clean --all
```

## A package which appears in conda list cannot be imported

Don't use `py` for python as doesn't point towards your conda executable it points towards:

```
C:\Windows\py.exe
```

Check that the capitalisation and spelling of every package is identical to that on the repo. Pint seems to have changed from `pint` to `Pint` after version 0.2, and I spend literally hours reinstalling and debugging my entire system trying to figure out why I couldn't import the module. Also, specifying `>=0.9` was not as affective as saying `=0.9.*`

Just don't name modules with capital letters.

Mixing mamba and conda could cause problems.








